if you've ever suddenly needed to buy a
computer memory or an ssd there's a good
chance you've experienced either sticker
shock or a pleasant surprise when you
looked up how much it cost indeed both
ram and the nand flash that holds the
data inside ssds are notorious for
fluctuating in price more than other
components
but why
to answer we spoke with our friends at
g-skill and we'd like to thank them for
contributing their insight as it turns
out the main reason is that both ram and
nand flash are commodity goods
and when we say commodity we mean a good
that can be used in many different types
of markets think about corn for example
you can eat it sure but it can also be
used for everything from animal feed to
biofuel so large amounts of it are
regularly sold to many different types
of businesses
the dram and nand markets work in much
the same way nearly all modern
electronic devices everything from tvs
to smart watches to heck even internet
connected microwaves need both ram and
flash storage not just computers by
comparison something like an x86 cpu
from intel or amd is really only being
sold to two kinds of markets system
integrators like dell or hp and
retailers like newegg and micro center
you also have the fact that dram and
nand can be shipped off more or less
unchanged to these different customers
for example the ram that's inside your
computer is not all that dissimilar from
the ram inside your phone so if a ram
manufacturer is trying to increase
supply to serve a bunch of different use
cases
all they really have to do is shrink the
process node so they can fit more ram
chips on one wafer then they cut it up
like a square cut pizza and send however
many chips to buyers serving each of
these different segments
contrast that with something like
manufacturing displays where different
resolutions and panel types mean that
serving many different markets is much
more challenging for any single
consolidated manufacturer so this ends
up meaning that more external forces are
exerting influence on how much dram and
nand will cost you and also means that
manufacturers have a much harder time
estimating how much supply they need to
keep on hand that means that both supply
gluts and shortages are more likely
shortages can and have been caused by
many different things for example there
can be unforeseen high demand when a hot
new phone comes out that everyone wants
or even a service that causes a spike in
demand on the server side of things i
mean think how much more memory google
might suddenly require if their stadia
game streaming service were to take off
good luck with that other times supply
can be strained by production problems
such as power outages that disable the
systems used to maintain their dust free
environments on the production line
meaning that manufacturers have to scrap
whatever's on the line and start from
scratch now this might only set things
back a week or two and have a minimal
impact on prices but other times natural
disasters like earthquakes and fires
have shut down fabs for months at a time
resulting in significant shortages in
supply something that notably happened
to sk hynix back in 2013. there's also
the possibility of politics muddying
things up as they so often do for
example there was a trade dispute
between japan and korea in 2019
japan supplies lots of raw materials
used in the manufacture of dram and nand
meaning that the fabs in korea couldn't
get the ingredients they needed for a
short while
now that situation was fortunately
resolved quickly but any kind of more
protracted conflict could have driven
prices up in a big way of course
sometimes mishaps end up working in the
consumer's favor instead in the mid
2000s there was a huge surge of people
buying mobile devices like phones and
the ram manufacturers assumed that this
trend would just
keep going the way that it was so they
started churning out lots more ram but
instead the market got saturated
suddenly everybody already had a phone
or two
and sales slowed down so suddenly there
was a lot of excess supply meaning that
folks who bought ram during this time
ended up getting a bargain there have
even been times that memory prices have
been pushed below the manufacturing cost
for the dram chips because it's worse
for the manufacturers to shut down the
fabs than to keep pumping out chips at a
loss like during the great pringles
incident of 1994
which actually wasn't a real thing it
was never a pringles incident
that i know of
but you know what there was this segue
to our sponsor brilliant brilliant's
mission is to help people achieve their
learning goals so whether you're a
student a professional brushing up or
learning a cutting edge topic or someone
who just wants to understand the world
better you should check out brilliant
you can check out their course on
computer science it'll give you a strong
understanding of fundamental algorithms
for a solid foundation in the subject
and you can even learn how to program a
drone cool right
if you're naturally curious you want to
build your problem solving skills or you
need to develop confidence in your
analytical abilities get brilliant
premium to learn something new every day
brilliance thought-provoking math
science and computer science content
helps guide you to mastery by taking
complex concepts and breaking them down
into bite-sized understandable chunks
the first 200 of you who head to
brilliant.org techwiki are going to get
20 off their annuals premium
subscription so go check it out right
now thanks for watching guys like
dislike check out our other videos leave
a comment if you have a suggestion for a
future fast as possible and please don't
forget to subscribe